What are the symptoms of typhoid fever?
Typhoid fever gets its name from a high fever that can last for weeks if left untreated. It often gets progressively worse over a few days.

Other symptoms of typhoid fever include:

Headache.
Chills.
Loss of appetite.
Stomach (abdominal) pain.
“Rose spots” rash, or faint pink spots, usually on your chest or stomach.
Cough.
Muscle aches.
Nausea, vomiting.
Diarrhea or constipation.
What causes typhoid fever?
Typhoid fever is caused by the bacterium S. Typhi. It lives in the gut (intestines) of infected people and can contaminate food and water.

How does typhoid fever spread?
Typhoid fever usually spreads through food or water contaminated with S. Typhi. This can happen if someone with typhoid touches something you eat or drink without washing their hands. It can also happen if waste water (water that has poop or pee in it) gets into water you drink or on food you eat.

You can get typhoid from another person if they don’t wash their hands after going to the bathroom. When they touch surfaces and objects (like phones or doorknobs) they can leave bacteria behind that can transfer to the next person who touches it.

Does typhoid spread by kissing?
No, typhoid doesn’t spread by kissing. You usually don’t get typhoid fever directly from another person. But you can get it if you touch something they’ve touched if they don’t wash their hands after going to the bathroom.

What are the stages of typhoid fever?
You can develop symptoms of typhoid fever gradually in four stages. Early treatment with antibiotics can keep you from progressing to later stages.

Stage 1. You can start getting typhoid symptoms anywhere from five to 14 days after coming in contact with S. Typhi. The first symptom is a fever that gets higher over a few days — called “stepwise” since it goes up in steps. The bacteria is moving into your blood in this stage.
Stage 2. Around the second week of fever, the bacteria is multiplying in your Peyer’s patches (part of your immune system that identifies harmful invaders). You’ll start experiencing abdominal pain and other stomach symptoms, like diarrhea or constipation. You might get “rose spots,” small pink dots on your skin that look like a rash.
Stage 3. If not treated with antibiotics, the bacteria can cause severe damage, usually around the third week after your symptoms start. Some people get serious complications, like internal bleeding and encephalitis (inflammation in your brain).
Stage 4. Stage four is when most people begin to recover. Your high fever begins to come down. S. Typhi can live in your gallbladder without causing symptoms, which means you may still be contagious even after you feel better.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is typhoid fever diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider will use your symptoms, your travel history and lab tests to diagnose typhoid fever. They’ll give you a physical exam and listen to your heart and lungs.

It’s very important to tell your provider if you’ve traveled recently or think you’ve been exposed to typhoid, otherwise they might not know to test for it. They’ll also use the information to decide what treatment to give.

What tests can be done to diagnose typhoid fever?
Your healthcare provider will take samples of body fluids or tissue to test for signs of S. Typhi. They might take samples of your:

Blood. Your provider will use a needle to take a small tube of blood from your arm.
Poop (stool). Your healthcare provider will give you a sterile container and instructions on how to collect a sample.
Pee (urine). You may be asked to pee into a cup given to you by your healthcare provider.
Your provider might numb your skin and take a sample with a small razor or scalpel.
Bone marrow. Your provider will numb your skin and use a special needle to get a sample of the inside of your bones. It’s rare that you’d ever need this test for diagnosis.
You provider may also take X-rays (pictures of the inside of your body) to look for changes in your lungs.

Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for typhoid fever?
Typhoid is treated with antibiotics. Some newer types of the bacteria are able to survive antibiotic treatments, so you’ll be treated with different antibiotics depending on what type of typhoid you have and where you got sick. Paratyphoid fever is also treated with antibiotics.

If you’re severely ill or have complications, you might need additional treatments. You’ll probably need to be admitted to the hospital for these treatments.

What medications are used to treat typhoid fever?
Your healthcare provider will treat typhoid fever with antibiotics, which may include:

Ciprofloxacin, levoflaxin or ofloxacin.
Ceftriaxone, cefotaxime or cefixime.
Azithromycin.
Carbapenems.
If your case is severe, you may be treated with steroids, like dexamethasone.

Antibiotic resistance in typhoid
Bacteria like S. Typhi can sometimes develop resistance to medications. This means that antibiotics don’t work to destroy them anymore (antibiotic resistance).

Many cases of typhoid can’t be destroyed by antibiotics we once used, but some drugs still work on them. Some are extremely drug resistant (XDR typhoid) and only a few antibiotics still work on them. This is one of the reasons that getting vaccinated to prevent typhoid is so important.

Health officials are concerned that we may no longer be able to treat typhoid if available medicines stop working. You’ll be treated with an antibiotic that works on the kind of typhoid you have based on the results of strain testing.

How do I take care of myself with typhoid fever?
To take care of yourself, make sure you finish all of your medicines as prescribed by your healthcare provider. Ask your provider if it’s safe to take non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) like ibuprofen (Advil® or Motrin®), naproxen sodium (Aleve®) or acetaminophen (Tylenol®) for pain or fever.

How soon after treatment for typhoid fever will I feel better?
If you’re treated early with an antibiotic, you should start to feel better in a few days. It might take a week to 10 days to feel completely recovered.

